<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Part II</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-2" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="title"><span epub:type="label">Part</span> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span></h2>
			<p>After my wife had a little recovered herself, she threw off the disguise and assumed her own apparel. We then stepped into the sitting-room, and asked to see the landlord. The man came in, but he seemed thunderstruck on finding a fugitive slave and his wife, instead of a “young cotton planter and his nigger.” As his eyes travelled round the room, he said to me, “Where is your master?” I pointed him out. The man gravely replied, “I am not joking, I really wish to see your master.” I pointed him out again, but at first he could not believe his eyes; he said “he knew that was not the gentleman that came with me.”</p>
			<p>But, after some conversation, we satisfied him that we were fugitive slaves, and had just escaped in the manner I have described. We asked him if he thought it would be safe for us to stop in Philadelphia. He said he thought not, but he would call in some persons who knew more about the laws than himself. He then went out, and kindly brought in several of the leading abolitionists of the city, who gave us a most hearty and friendly welcome amongst them. As it was in December, and also as we had just left a very warm climate, they advised us not to go to Canada as we had intended, but to settle at Boston in the United States. It is true that the constitution of the Republic has always guaranteed the slaveholders the right to come into any of the so-called free States, and take their fugitives back to southern Egypt. But through the untiring, uncompromising, and manly efforts of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Garrison, Wendell Phillips, Theodore Parker, and a host of other noble abolitionists of Boston and the neighbourhood, public opinion in Massachusetts had become so much opposed to slavery and to kidnapping, that it was almost impossible for anyone to take a fugitive slave out of that State.</p>
			<p>So we took the advice of our good Philadelphia friends, and settled at Boston. I shall have something to say about our sojourn there presently.</p>
			<p>Among other friends we met with at Philadelphia, was Robert Purves, <abbr>Esq.</abbr>, a well educated and wealthy colored gentleman, who introduced us to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Barkley Ivens, a member of the Society of Friends, and a noble and generous-hearted farmer, who lived at some distance in the country.</p>
			<p>This good Samaritan at once invited us to go and stop quietly with his family, till my wife could somewhat recover from the fearful reaction of the past journey. We most gratefully accepted the invitation, and at the time appointed we took a steamer to a place up the Delaware river, where our new and dear friend met us with his snug little cart, and took us to his happy home. This was the first act of great and disinterested kindness we had ever received from a white person.</p>
			<p>The gentleman was not of the fairest complexion, and therefore, as my wife was not in the room when I received the information respecting him and his anti-slavery character, she thought of course he was a quadroon like herself. But on arriving at the house, and finding out her mistake, she became more nervous and timid than ever.</p>
			<p>As the cart came into the yard, the dear good old lady, and her three charming and affectionate daughters, all came to the door to meet us. We got out, and the gentleman said, “Go in, and make yourselves at home; I will see after the baggage.” But my wife was afraid to approach them. She stopped in the yard, and said to me, “William, I thought we were coming among colored people?” I replied, “It is all right; these are the same.” “No,” she said, “it is not all right, and I am not going to stop here; I have no confidence whatever in white people, they are only trying to get us back to slavery.” She turned round and said, “I am going right off.” The old lady then came out, with her sweet, soft, and winning smile, shook her heartily by the hand, and kindly said, “How art thou, my dear? We are all very glad to see thee and thy husband. Come in, to the fire; I dare say thou art cold and hungry after thy journey.”</p>
			<p>We went in, and the young ladies asked if she would like to go upstairs and “fix” herself before tea. My wife said, “No, I thank you; I shall only stop a little while.” “But where art thou going this cold night?” said <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Ivens, who had just stepped in. “I don’t know,” was the reply. “Well, then,” he continued, “I think thou hadst better take off thy things and sit near the fire; tea will soon be ready. “Yes, come, Ellen,” said <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Ivens, “let me assist thee;” (as she commenced undoing my wife’s bonnet-strings;) “don’t be frightened, Ellen, I shall not hurt a single hair of thy head. We have heard with much pleasure of the marvellous escape of thee and thy husband, and deeply sympathise with thee in all that thou hast undergone. I don’t wonder at thee, poor thing, being timid; but thou needs not fear us; we would as soon send one of our own daughters into slavery as thee; so thou mayest make thyself quite at ease!” These soft and soothing words fell like balm upon my wife’s unstrung nerves, and melted her to tears; her fears and prejudices vanished, and from that day she has firmly believed that there are good and bad persons of every shade of complexion.</p>
			<p>After seeing Sally Ann and Jacob, two colored domestics, my wife felt quite at home. After partaking of what <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Stowe’s Mose and Pete called a “busting supper,” the ladies wished to know whether we could read. On learning we could not, they said if we liked they would teach us. To this kind offer, of course, there was no objection. But we looked rather knowingly at each other, as much as to say that they would have rather a hard task to cram anything into our thick and matured skulls.</p>
			<p>However, all hands set to and quickly cleared away the tea-things, and the ladies and their good brother brought out the spelling and copy books and slates, etc., and commenced with their new and green pupils. We had, by stratagem, learned the alphabet while in slavery, but not the writing characters; and, as we had been such a time learning so little, we at first felt that it was a waste of time for anyone at our ages to undertake to learn to read and write. But, as the ladies were so anxious that we should learn, and so willing to teach us, we concluded to give our whole minds to the work, and see what could be done. By so doing, at the end of the three weeks we remained with the good family we could spell and write our names quite legibly. They all begged us to stop longer; but, as we were not safe in the State of Pennsylvania, and also as we wished to commence doing something for a livelihood, we did not remain.</p>
			<p>When the time arrived for us to leave for Boston, it was like parting with our relatives. We have since met with many very kind and hospitable friends, both in America and England; but we have never been under a roof where we were made to feel more at home, or where the inmates took a deeper interest in our well-being, than <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Barkley Ivens and his dear family. May God ever bless them, and preserve each one from every reverse of fortune!</p>
			<p>We finally, as I have stated, settled at Boston, where we remained nearly two years, I employed as cabinetmaker and furniture broker, and my wife at her needle; and, as our little earnings in slavery were not all spent on the journey, we were getting on very well, and would have made money, if we had not been compelled by the General Government, at the bidding of the slaveholders, to break up business, and fly from under the Stars and Stripes to save our liberties and our lives.</p>
			<p>In 1850, Congress passed the Fugitive Slave Bill, an enactment too infamous to have been thought of or tolerated by any people in the world, except the unprincipled and tyrannical Yankees. The following are a few of the leading features of the above law; which requires, under heavy penalties, that the inhabitants of the <em>free</em> States should not only refuse food and shelter to a starving, hunted human being, but also should assist, if called upon by the authorities, to seize the unhappy fugitive and send him back to slavery.</p>
			<p>In no case is a person’s evidence admitted in Court, in defence of his liberty, when arrested under this law.</p>
			<p>If the judge decides that the prisoner is a slave, he gets ten dollars; but if he sets him at liberty, he only receives five.</p>
			<p>After the prisoner has been sentenced to slavery, he is handed over to the United States Marshal, who has the power, at the expense of the General Government, to summon a sufficient force to take the poor creature back to slavery, and to the lash, from which he fled.</p>
			<p>Our old masters sent agents to Boston after us. They took out warrants, and placed them in the hands of the United States Marshal to execute. But the following letter from our highly esteemed and faithful friend, the <abbr>Rev.</abbr> Samuel May, of Boston, to our equally dear and much lamented friend, <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Estlin of Bristol, will show why we were not taken into custody.</p>
			<p>“21, Cornhill, Boston, “November 6th, 1850.</p>
			<p>“My dear <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Estlin,</p>
			<p>“I trust that in God’s good providence this letter will be handed to you in safety by our good friends, William and Ellen Craft. They have lived amongst us about two years, and have proved themselves worthy, in all respects, of our confidence and regard. The laws of this republican and Christian land (tell it not in Moscow, nor in Constantinople) regard them only as slaves⁠—chattels⁠—personal property. But they nobly vindicated their title and right to freedom, two years since, by winning their way to it; at least, so they thought. But now, the slave power, with the aid of Daniel Webster and a band of lesser traitors, has enacted a law, which puts their dearly-bought liberties in the most imminent peril; holds out a strong temptation to every mercenary and unprincipled ruffian to become their kidnapper; and has stimulated the slaveholders generally to such desperate acts for the recovery of their fugitive property, as have never before been enacted in the history of this government.</p>
			<p>“Within a fortnight, two fellows from Macon, Georgia, have been in Boston for the purpose of arresting our friends William and Ellen. A writ was served against them from the United States District Court; but it was not served by the United States Marshal; why not, is not certainly known: perhaps through fear, for a general feeling of indignation, and a cool determination not to allow this young couple to be taken from Boston into slavery, was aroused, and pervaded the city. It is understood that one of the judges told the Marshal that he would not be authorised in breaking the door of Craft’s house. Craft kept himself close within the house, armed himself, and awaited with remarkable composure the event. Ellen, in the meantime, had been taken to a retired place out of the city. The Vigilance Committee (appointed at a late meeting in Fanueil Hall) enlarged their numbers, held an almost permanent session, and appointed various subcommittees to act in different ways. One of these committees called repeatedly on <abbr>Messrs.</abbr> Hughes and Knight, the slave-catchers, and requested and advised them to leave the city. At first they peremptorily refused to do so, ”till they got hold of the niggers.’ On complaint of different persons, these two fellows were several times arrested, carried before one of our county courts, and held to bail on charges of ‘conspiracy to kidnap,’ and of ‘defamation,’ in calling William and Ellen ‘<em>slaves</em>.’ At length, they became so alarmed, that they left the city by an indirect route, evading the vigilance of many persons who were on the lookout for them. Hughes, at one time, was near losing his life at the hands of an infuriated colored man. While these men remained in the city, a prominent whig gentleman sent word to William Craft, that if he would submit peaceably to an arrest, he and his wife should be bought from their owners, cost what it might. Craft replied, in effect, that he was in a measure the representative of all the other fugitives in Boston, some 200 or 300 in number; that, if he gave up, they would all be at the mercy of the slave-catchers, and must fly from the city at any sacrifice; and that, if his freedom could be bought for two cents, he would not consent to compromise the matter in such a way. This event has stirred up the slave spirit of the country, south and north; the United States government is determined to try its hand in enforcing the Fugitive Slave law; and William and Ellen Craft would be prominent objects of the slaveholders’ vengeance. Under these circumstances, it is the almost unanimous opinion of their best friends, that they should quit America as speedily as possible, and seek an asylum in England! Oh! shame, shame upon us, that Americans, whose fathers fought against Great Britain, in order to be <em>free</em>, should have to acknowledge this disgraceful fact! God gave us a fair and goodly heritage in this land, but man has cursed it with his devices and crimes against human souls and human rights. Is America the ‘land of the free, and the home of the brave?’ God knows it is not; and we know it too. A brave young man and a virtuous young woman must fly the American shores, and seek, under the shadow of the British throne, the enjoyment of ‘life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness.’</p>
			<p>“But I must pursue my plain, sad story. All day long, I have been busy planning a safe way for William and Ellen to leave Boston. We dare not allow them to go on board a vessel, even in the port of Boston; for the writ is yet in the Marshal’s hands, and he <em>may</em> be waiting an opportunity to serve it; so I am expecting to accompany them tomorrow to Portland, Maine, which is beyond the reach of the Marshal’s authority; and there I hope to see them on board a British steamer.</p>
			<p>“This letter is written to introduce them to you. I know your infirm health; but I am sure, if you were stretched on your bed in your last illness, and could lift your hand at all, you would extend it to welcome these poor hunted fellow-creatures. Henceforth, England is their nation and their home. It is with real regret for our personal loss in their departure, as well as burning shame for the land that is not worthy of them, that we send them away, or rather allow them to go. But, with all the resolute courage they have shown in a most trying hour, they themselves see it is the part of a foolhardy rashness to attempt to stay here longer.</p>
			<p>“I must close; and with many renewed thanks for all your kind words and deeds towards us,</p>
			<p>“I am, very respectfully yours,</p>
			<h5 id="id00312">“<em>samuel</em> <em>may</em>, <em>jun</em>.”</h5>
			<p>Our old masters, having heard how their agents were treated at Boston, wrote to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Filmore, who was then President of the States, to know what he could do to have us sent back to slavery. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Filmore said that we should be returned. He gave instructions for military force to be sent to Boston to assist the officers in making the arrest. Therefore we, as well as our friends (among whom was George Thompson, <abbr>Esq.</abbr>, late <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">M.P.</abbr> for the Tower Hamlets⁠—the slave’s long-tried, self-sacrificing friend, and eloquent advocate) thought it best, at any sacrifice, to leave the mock-free Republic, and come to a country where we and our dear little ones can be truly free.⁠—“No one daring to molest or make us afraid.” But, as the officers were watching every vessel that left the port to prevent us from escaping, we had to take the expensive and tedious overland route to Halifax.</p>
			<p>We shall always cherish the deepest feelings of gratitude to the Vigilance Committee of Boston (upon which were many of the leading abolitionists), and also to our numerous friends, for the very kind and noble manner in which they assisted us to preserve our liberties and to escape from Boston, as it were like Lot from Sodom, to a place of refuge, and finally to this truly free and glorious country; where no tyrant, let his power be ever so absolute over his poor trembling victims at home, dare come and lay violent hands upon us or upon our dear little boys (who had the good fortune to be born upon British soil), and reduce us to the legal level of the beast that perisheth. Oh! may God bless the thousands of unflinching, disinterested abolitionists of America, who are labouring through evil as well as through good report, to cleanse their country’s escutcheon from the foul and destructive blot of slavery, and to restore to every bondman his God-given rights; and may God ever smile upon England and upon England’s good, much-beloved, and deservedly-honoured Queen, for the generous protection that is given to unfortunate refugees of every rank, and of every color and clime.</p>
			<p>On the passing of the Fugitive Slave Bill, the following learned doctors, as well as a host of lesser traitors, came out strongly in its defence.</p>
			<p>The <abbr>Rev.</abbr> <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Gardiner Spring, an eminent Presbyterian Clergyman of New York, well known in this country by his religious publications, declared from the pulpit that, “if by one prayer he could liberate every slave in the world he would not dare to offer it.”</p>
			<p>The <abbr>Rev.</abbr> <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Joel Parker, of Philadelphia, in the course of a discussion on the nature of Slavery, says, “What, then, are the evils inseparable from slavery? There is not one that is not equally inseparable from depraved human nature in other lawful relations.”</p>
			<p>The <abbr>Rev.</abbr> Moses Stuart, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">D.D.</abbr>, (late Professor in the Theological College of Andover), in his vindication of this Bill, reminds his readers that “many Southern slaveholders are true <em>Christians</em>.” That “sending back a fugitive to them is not like restoring one to an idolatrous people.” That “though we may <em>pity</em> the fugitive, yet the Mosaic Law does not authorize the rejection of the claims of the slaveholders to their stolen or strayed <em>property</em>.”</p>
			<p>The <abbr>Rev.</abbr> <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Spencer, of Brooklyn, New York,<br/>
			has come forward in support of the “Fugitive<br/>
			Slave Bill,” by publishing a sermon entitled the<br/>
			“Religious Duty of Obedience to the Laws,” which<br/>
			has elicited the highest encomiums from <abbr>Dr.</abbr><br/>
			Samuel <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Cox, the Presbyterian minister of<br/>
			Brooklyn (notorious both in this country and<br/>
			America for his sympathy with the slaveholder).<br/></p>
			<p>The <abbr>Rev.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W. M.</abbr> Rogers, an orthodox minister of Boston, delivered a sermon in which he says, “When the slave asks me to stand between him and his master, what does he ask? He asks me to murder a nation’s life; and I will not do it, because I have a conscience⁠—because there is a God.” He proceeds to affirm that if resistance to the carrying out of the “Fugitive Slave Law” should lead the magistracy to call the citizens to arms, their duty was to obey and “if ordered to take human life, in the name of God to take it;” and he concludes by admonishing the fugitives to “hearken to the Word of God, and to count their own masters worthy of all honour.”</p>
			<p>The <abbr>Rev.</abbr> William Crowell, of Waterfield, State of Maine, printed a Thanksgiving Sermon of the same kind, in which he calls upon his hearers not to allow “excessive sympathies for a few hundred fugitives to blind them so that they may risk increased suffering to the millions already in chains.”</p>
			<p>The <abbr>Rev.</abbr> <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Taylor, an Episcopal Clergyman of New Haven, Connecticut, made a speech at a Union Meeting, in which he deprecates the agitation on the law, and urges obedience to it; asking⁠—“Is that article in the Constitution contrary to the law of Nature, of nations, or to the will of God? Is it so? Is there a shadow of reason for saying it? I have not been able to discover it. Have I not shown you it is lawful to deliver up, in compliance with the laws, fugitive slaves, for the high, the great, the momentous interests of those [Southern] States?”</p>
			<p>The Right <abbr>Rev.</abbr> Bishop Hopkins, of Vermont, in a Lecture at Lockport, says, “It was warranted by the Old Testament;” and inquires, “What effect had the Gospel in doing away with slavery? None whatever.” Therefore he argues, as it is expressly permitted by the Bible, it does not in itself involve any sin; but that every Christian is authorised by the Divine Law to own slaves, provided they were not treated with unnecessary cruelty.</p>
			<p>The <abbr>Rev.</abbr> Orville Dewey, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">D.D.</abbr>, of the Unitarian connection, maintained in his lectures that the safety of the Union is not to be hazarded for the sake of the African race. He declares that, for his part, he would send his own brother or child into slavery, if needed to preserve the Union between the free and the slaveholding States; and, counselling the slave to similar magnanimity, thus exhorts him:⁠—“<em>Your right to be free is not absolute, unqualified, irrespective of all consequences</em>. If my espousal of your claim is likely to involve your race and mine together in disasters infinitely greater than your personal servitude, then you ought not to be free. In such a case personal rights ought to be sacrificed to the general good. You yourself ought to see this, and be willing to suffer for a while⁠—one for many.”</p>
			<p>If the Doctor is prepared, he is quite at liberty to sacrifice his “personal rights to the general good.” But, as I have suffered a long time in slavery, it is hardly fair for the Doctor to advise me to go back. According to his showing, he ought rather to take my place. That would be practically carrying out his logic, as respects “suffering awhile⁠—one for many.”</p>
			<p>In fact, so eager were they to prostrate themselves before the great idol of slavery, and, like Balaam, to curse instead of blessing the people whom God had brought out of bondage, that they in bring up obsolete passages from the Old Testament to justify their downward course, overlooked, or would not see, the following verses, which show very clearly, according to the Doctor’s own textbook, that the slaves have a right to run away, and that it is unscriptural for anyone to send them back.</p>
			<p>In the 23rd chapter of Deuteronomy, 15th and 16th verses, it is thus written:⁠—“Thou shalt not deliver unto his master the servant which is escaped from his master unto thee. He shall dwell with thee, even among you, in that place which he shall choose in one of thy gates, where it liketh him best: thou shalt not oppress him.”</p>
			<p>“Hide the outcast. Bewray not him that wandereth. Let mine outcasts dwell with thee. Be thou a covert to them from the face of the spoiler.”⁠—(<cite>Isaiah 3:4</cite>)</p>
			<p>The great majority of the American ministers are not content with uttering sentences similar to the above, or remaining wholly indifferent to the cries of the poor bondman; but they do all they can to blast the reputation, and to muzzle the mouths, of the few good men who dare to beseech the God of mercy “to loose the bonds of wickedness, to undo the heavy burdens, and let the oppressed go free.” These reverend gentlemen pour a terrible cannonade upon “Jonah,” for refusing to carry God’s message against Nineveh, and tell us about the whale in which he was entombed; while they utterly overlook the existence of the whales which trouble their republican waters, and know not that they themselves are the “Jonahs” who threaten to sink their ship of state, by steering in an unrighteous direction. We are told that the whale vomited up the runaway prophet. This would not have seemed so strange, had it been one of the above lukewarm Doctors of Divinity whom he had swallowed; for even a whale might find such a morsel difficult of digestion.</p>
			<p>“I venerate the man whose heart is warm,<br/>
			 Whose hands are pure; whose doctrines and whose life<br/>
			 Coincident, exhibit lucid proof<br/>
			 That he is honest in the sacred cause.”<br/></p>
			<p>“But grace abused brings forth the foulest deeds,<br/>
			 As richest soil the most luxuriant weeds.”<br/></p>
			<p>I must now leave the reverend gentlemen in the hands of Him who knows best how to deal with a recreant ministry.</p>
			<p>I do not wish it to be understood that all the ministers of the States are of the Balaam stamp. There are those who are as uncompromising with slaveholders as Moses was with Pharaoh, and, like Daniel, will never bow down before the great false God that has been set up.</p>
			<p>On arriving at Portland, we found that the steamer we intended to take had run into a schooner the previous night, and was lying up for repairs; so we had to wait there, in fearful suspense, for two or three days. During this time, we had the honour of being the guest of the late and much lamented Daniel Oliver, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Esq.</abbr>, one of the best and most hospitable men in the State. By simply fulfilling the Scripture injunction, to take in the stranger, etc., he ran the risk of incurring a penalty of 2,000 dollars, and twelve months’ imprisonment.</p>
			<p>But neither the Fugitive Slave Law, nor any other Satanic enactment, can ever drive the spirit of liberty and humanity out of such noble and generous-hearted men.</p>
			<p>May God ever bless his dear widow, and eventually unite them in His courts above!</p>
			<p>We finally got off to <abbr>St.</abbr> John’s, New Brunswick, where we had to wait two days for the steamer that conveyed us to Windsor, Nova Scotia.</p>
			<p>On going into a hotel at <abbr>St.</abbr> John’s, we met the butler in the hall, to whom I said, “We wish to stop here tonight.” He turned round, scratching his head, evidently much put about. But thinking that my wife was white, he replied, “We have plenty of room for the lady, but I don’t know about yourself; we never take in colored folks.” “Oh, don’t trouble about me,” I said; “if you have room for the lady, that will do; so please have the luggage taken to a bedroom.” Which was immediately done, and my wife went upstairs into the apartment.</p>
			<p>After taking a little walk in the town, I returned, and asked to see the “lady.” On being conducted to the little sitting-room, where she then was, I entered without knocking, much to the surprise of the whole house. The “lady” then rang the bell, and ordered dinner for two. “Dinner for two, mum!” exclaimed the waiter, as he backed out of the door. “Yes, for two,” said my wife. In a little while the stout, red-nosed butler, whom we first met, knocked at the door. I called out, “Come in.” On entering, he rolled his whisky eyes at me, and then at my wife, and said, in a very solemn tone, “Did you order dinner for two, mum?” “Yes, for two,” my wife again replied. This confused the chubby butler more than ever; and, as the landlord was not in the house, he seemed at a loss what to do.</p>
			<p>When dinner was ready, the maid came in and said, “Please, mum, the Missis wishes to know whether you will have dinner up now, or wait till your friend arrives?” “I will have it up at once, if you please.” “Thank you, mum,” continued the maid, and out she glided.</p>
			<p>After a good deal of giggling in the passage, someone said, “You are in for it, butler, after all; so you had better make the best of a bad job.” But before dinner was sent up, the landlord returned, and having heard from the steward of the steamer by which we came that we were bound for England, the proprietor’s native country, he treated us in the most respectful manner.</p>
			<p>At the above house, the boots (whose name I forget) was a fugitive slave, a very intelligent and active man, about forty-five years of age. Soon after his marriage, while in slavery, his bride was sold away from him, and he could never learn where the poor creature dwelt. So after remaining single for many years, both before and after his escape, and never expecting to see again, nor even to hear from, his long-lost partner, he finally married a woman at <abbr>St.</abbr> John’s. But, poor fellow, as he was passing down the street one day, he met a woman; at the first glance they nearly recognized each other; they both turned round and stared, and unconsciously advanced, till she screamed and flew into his arms. Her first words were, “Dear, are you married?” On his answering in the affirmative, she shrank from his embrace, hung her head, and wept. A person who witnessed this meeting told me it was most affecting.</p>
			<p>This couple knew nothing of each other’s escape or whereabouts. The woman had escaped a few years before to the free States, by secreting herself in the hold of a vessel; but as they tried to get her back to bondage, she fled to New Brunswick for that protection which her native country was too mean to afford.</p>
			<p>The man at once took his old wife to see his new one, who was also a fugitive slave, and as they all knew the workings of the infamous system of slavery, the could (as no one else can,) sympathise with each other’s misfortune.</p>
			<p>According to the rules of slavery, the man and his first wife were already divorced, but not morally; and therefore it was arranged between the three that he should live only with the lastly married wife, and allow the other one so much a week, as long as she requested his assistance.</p>
			<p>After staying at <abbr>St.</abbr> John’s two days, the steamer arrived, which took us to Windsor, where we found a coach bound for Halifax. Prejudice against color forced me on the top in the rain. On arriving within about seven miles of the town, the coach broke down and was upset. I fell upon the big crotchety driver, whose head stuck in the mud; and as he “always objected to niggers riding inside with white folks,” I was not particularly sorry to see him deeper in the mire than myself. All of us were scratched and bruised more or less. After the passengers had crawled out as best they could, we all set off, and paddled through the deep mud and cold and rain, to Halifax.</p>
			<p>On leaving Boston, it was our intention to reach Halifax at least two or three days before the steamer from Boston touched there, en route for Liverpool; but, having been detained so long at Portland and <abbr>St.</abbr> John’s, we had the misfortune to arrive at Halifax at dark, just two hours after the steamer had gone; consequently we had to wait there a fortnight, for the Cambria.</p>
			<p>The coach was patched up, and reached Halifax with the luggage, soon after the passengers arrived. The only respectable hotel that was then in the town had suspended business, and was closed; so we went to the inn, opposite the market, where the coach stopped: a most miserable, dirty hole it was.</p>
			<p>Knowing that we were still under the influence of the low Yankee prejudice, I sent my wife in with the other passengers, to engage a bed for herself and husband. I stopped outside in the rain till the coach came up. If I had gone in and asked for a bed they would have been quite full. But as they thought my wife was white, she had no difficulty in securing apartments, into which the luggage was afterwards carried. The landlady, observing that I took an interest in the baggage, became somewhat uneasy, and went into my wife’s room, and said to her, “Do you know the dark man downstairs?” “Yes, he is my husband.” “Oh! I mean the black man⁠—the <em>nigger?</em>” “I quite understand you; he is my husband.” “My God!” exclaimed the woman as she flounced out and banged to the door. On going upstairs, I heard what had taken place: but, as we were there, and did not mean to leave that night, we did not disturb ourselves. On our ordering tea, the landlady sent word back to say that we must take it in the kitchen, or in our bedroom, as she had no other room for “niggers.” We replied that we were not particular, and that they could sent it up to our room⁠—which they did.</p>
			<p>After the pro-slavery persons who were staying there heard that we were in, the whole house became agitated, and all sorts of oaths and fearful threats were heaped upon the “d⁠⸺⁠d niggers, for coming among white folks.” Some of them said they would not stop there a minute if there was another house to go to.</p>
			<p>The mistress came up the next morning to know how long we wished to stop. We said a fortnight. “Oh! dear me, it is impossible for us to accommodate you, and I think you had better go: you must understand, I have no prejudice myself; I think a good deal of the colored people, and have always been their friend; but if you stop here we shall lose all our customers, which we can’t do nohow.” We said we were glad to hear that she had “no prejudice,” and was such a staunch friend to the colored people. We also informed her that we would be sorry for her “customers” to leave on our account; and as it was not our intention to interfere with anyone, it was foolish for them to be frightened away. However, if she would get us a comfortable place, we would be glad to leave. The landlady said she would go out and try. After spending the whole morning in canvassing the town, she came to our room and said, “I have been from one end of the place to the other, but everybody is full.” Having a little foretaste of the vulgar prejudice of the town, we did not wonder at this result. However, the landlady gave me the address of some respectable colored families, whom she thought, “under the circumstances,” might be induced to take us. And, as we were not at all comfortable⁠—being compelled to sit, eat and sleep, in the same small room⁠—we were quite willing to change our quarters.</p>
			<p>I called upon the <abbr>Rev.</abbr> <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Cannady, a truly good-hearted Christian man, who received us at a word; and both he and his kind lady treated us handsomely, and for a nominal charge.</p>
			<p>My wife and myself were both unwell when we left Boston, and, having taken fresh cold on the journey to Halifax, we were laid up there under the doctor’s care, nearly the whole fortnight. I had much worry about getting tickets, for they baffled us shamefully at the Cunard office. They at first said that they did not book till the steamer came; which was not the fact. When I called again, they said they knew the steamer would come full from Boston, and therefore we had “better try to get to Liverpool by other means.” Other mean Yankee excuses were made; and it was not till an influential gentleman, to whom <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Francis Jackson, of Boston, kindly gave us a letter, went and rebuked them, that we were able to secure our tickets. So when we went on board my wife was very poorly, and was also so ill on the voyage that I did not believe she could live to see Liverpool.</p>
			<p>However, I am thankful to say she arrived; and, after laying up at Liverpool very ill for two or three weeks, gradually recovered.</p>
			<p>It was not until we stepped upon the shore at Liverpool that we were free from every slavish fear.</p>
			<p>We raised our thankful hearts to Heaven, and could have knelt down, like the Neapolitan exiles, and kissed the soil; for we felt that from slavery</p>
			<p>“Heaven sure had kept this spot of earth uncurs’d,<br/>
			 To show how all lthings were created first.”<br/></p>
			<p>In a few days after we landed, the <abbr>Rev.</abbr> Francis Bishop and his lady came and invited us to be their guests; to whose unlimited kindness and watchful care my wife owes, in a great degree, her restoration to health.</p>
			<p>We enclosed our letter from the <abbr>Rev.</abbr> <abbr>Mr.</abbr> May to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Estlin, who at once wrote to invite us to his house at Bristol. On arriving there, both <abbr>Mr.</abbr> and Miss Estlin received us as cordially as did our first good Quaker friends in Pennsylvania. It grieves me much to have to mention that he is no more. Everyone who knew him can truthfully say⁠—</p>
			<p>“Peace to the memory of a man of worth,<br/>
			A man of letters, and of manners too!<br/>
			Of manners sweet as Virtue always wears<br/>
			When gay Good-nature dresses her in smiles.”<br/></p>
			<p>It was principally through the extreme kindness of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Estlin, the Right <abbr>Hon.</abbr> Lady Noel Byron, Miss Harriet Martineau, <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Reid, Miss Sturch, and a few other good friends, that my wife and myself were able to spend a short time at a school in this country, to acquire a little of that education which we were so shamefully deprived of while in the house of bondage. The school is under the supervision of the Misses Lushington, <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">D.C.L.</abbr> During our stay at the school we received the greatest attention from everyone; and I am particularly indebted to Thomas Wilson, <abbr>Esq.</abbr>, of Bradmore House, Chiswick, (who was then the master,) for the deep interest he took in trying to get me on in my studies. We shall ever fondly and gratefully cherish the memory of our endeared and departed friend, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Estlin. We, as well as the Anti-Slavery cause, lost a good friend in him. However, if departed spirits in Heaven are conscious of the wickedness of this world, and are allowed to speak, he will never fail to plead in the presence of the angelic host, and before the great and just Judge, for downtrodden and outraged humanity.</p>
			<p>“Therefore I cannot think thee wholly gone;<br/>
			 The better part of thee is with us still;<br/>
			 Thy soul its hampering clay aside hath thrown,<br/>
			 And only freer wrestles with the ill.<br/></p>
			<p>“Thou livest in the life of all good things;<br/>
			 What words thou spak’st for Freedom shall not die;<br/>
			 Thou sleepest not, for now thy Love hath wings<br/>
			 To soar where hence thy hope could hardly fly.<br/></p>
			<p>“And often, from that other world, on this<br/>
			 Some gleams from great souls gone before may shine,<br/>
			 To shed on struggling hearts a clearer bliss,<br/>
			 And clothe the Right with lustre more divine.<br/></p>
			<p>“Farewell! good man, good angel now! this hand<br/>
			 Soon, like thine own, shall lose its cunning, too;<br/>
			 Soon shall this soul, like thine, bewildered stand,<br/>
			 Then leap to thread the free unfathomed blue.”<br/></p>
			<h4><em>james</em> <em>russell</em> <em>lowell</em>.</h4>
			<p>In the preceding pages I have not dwelt upon the great barbarities which are practised upon the slaves; because I wish to present the system in its mildest form, and to show that the “tender mercies of the wicked are cruel.” But I do now, however, most solemnly declare, that a very large majority of the American slaves are overworked, underfed, and frequently unmercifully flogged.</p>
			<p>I have often seen slaves tortured in every conceivable manner. I have seen him hunted down and torn by bloodhounds. I have seen them shamefully beaten, and branded with hot irons. I have seen them hunted, and even burned alive at the stake, frequently for offences that would be applauded if committed by white persons for similar purposes.</p>
			<p>In short, it is well known in England, if not all over the world, that the Americans, as a people, are notoriously mean and cruel towards all colored persons, whether they are bond or free.</p>
			<p>“Oh, tyrant, thou who sleepest<br/>
			 On a volcano, from whose pent-up wrath,<br/>
			 Already some red flashes bursting up,<br/>
			 Beware!”<br/></p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
